You know, this season we're focusing on this theme of considering the star.
And two of our sons live down in Bend, Oregon.
And not too far outside of Bend, there is a designated dark sky park.
Maybe you've heard of these.
There are a number of them, both around the United States and around the world.
And what they are, they are areas that are far enough away from city lights and roadways that are full of
LED and halogen headlights that you can still see the night sky without any kind of light pollution to interfere it.
And I thought, what an odd thing it is, really, that our world has been so invaded with artificial light that we need to designate and guard places to let us watch the stars.
You know, that kind of obscuring of the stars, that is a very modern phenomena.
Humans for most of history have
enjoyed really an unobstructed view of the heavens.
And when night descended, their gaze was not directed toward the screen of their phone, or their TV, or their iPad.
If they wanted to watch something at night, they looked at the heavens above.
The story of Christ's birth, as related by Matthew, prominently features this group of men known as the Magi, or the Wise Men, as it is often translated in our English Bibles.
The Magi not only enjoyed looking at the stars, they made their life's work to study the heavens.
And by that careful observation of the stars above, what they hoped was to gain some kind of insight into the goings on of life here below.
We find this account from Matthew chapter one.
Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea,
In the days of Herod the King, behold, wise men, or magi from the east, came to Jerusalem saying, where is he who has been born king of the Jews?
For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him."
I don't know about you, but that verse raises so many questions in my mind.
Who were these magi?
Where did they come from?
What had they seen?
And why did they make the conclusions that they made when they saw whatever it was that they saw?
And that star, what was that star?
Simply by its appearance in the sky, it not only had indicated to them that a new king had been born, specifically a Jewish king, but it even led them, the scripture says, to the very village, to the very house where he was.
What was that all about?
There have been lots of theories proposed.
Some people, of course, simply dismiss a story like this as legend.
They see it as just the fanciful writing of perhaps overeager devotees of Jesus, and a story that maybe was swallowed whole by very naive and primitive and superstitious people and simply has become the stuff of legend and folklore that's been passed down to us.
But you'll also find that there are a lot of serious thinkers, some of them biblical scholars, some of them astronomers that don't dismiss this story quite so lightly.
The theories as to who these night visitors were and exactly what it was they saw are the things that have made for many scholarly debates.
But if you read the debate, you'll find woven through all of them the fact that there are genuinely defensible explanations
for this story as a story of history, something of reality, and that that reality speaks to even greater realities, which is the great good news of Christmas.
Many of you maybe have seen Rick Larson's The Bethlehem Star.
You can find this online to watch, and he lays out one very plausible explanation for what it was the wise men saw that night.
He links the phenomena to a very unique visual rendezvous
of the planet Jupiter and the bright star Regulus.
And he has quite an interesting argument to that effect.
The most detailed study that I've seen though has been by a guy named Colin Nicol.
He believes the star seen by the magi was actually a great comet.
And he presents a very compelling argument, I think.
In fact, by the way, here's a couple of fun comet facts.
Did you know
that comets, the tail of a comet, is always pointing away from the sun.
Maybe you thought that the tail was streaming out because of how the comet was moving and it was kind of trailing out behind it.
That's not actually the effect.
Whatever side of the comet is facing the sun, the photons of the sun, that solar wind, are striking it, and they're causing whatever's coming off of the comet to flow away from the sun.
So the tail always goes away from the sun, no matter which direction the comet is moving.
Also, did you know that the glowing cloud of gas and dust that goes around a comet is called its coma?
I thought about trying to lay out some of the arguments for it being a comet, but the more I worked on it, the more I realized that I really couldn't do justice to it in a brief morning talk, and I also thought if I attempted it, a whole lot of your heads would be surrounded by comas.
Let me just give you one little tidbit.
A very plausible explanation of the star going before the Magi and coming to rest over the house where Jesus and Mary were.
That is probably one of the most debated things.
Like what does that mean?
Was there some kind of a magic road flare that was floating in the sky and stopped over a particular little house?
How does that work?
Colin Nicholl thinks that if it's the kind of comet that he thinks it was,
that at the end of their journey for the Magi, the wise men, the observed position in the night sky would have moved from south, southeast to south, southwest over a period of a couple of hours.
And that is the direction from Jerusalem to Bethlehem.
That's what the Bible tells us.
They went to Jerusalem first, asking questions.
They're directed to Bethlehem.
Colin lays out a really good argument that if this was a comet they were looking at,
over a span of about two hours, it would have moved from Jerusalem toward Bethlehem.
And ultimately, its observed movement, standing from ground looking at this thing, its observed movement would have seemed to come to stand still near the horizon.
And if the house that Jesus was in
was actually on any kind of a ridge or a rise, the effect would have been looking at it that the star was standing directly over it with a tail, so it was pointing down at a specific point.
By the way, that picture there is actually Comet McNaught.
That was taken in Victoria, Australia back in 2007, but you can see how it's like that Comet is just pointing at a given point.
What I really want to consider, though, is those magi.
those mysterious men who considered that star worth this epic journey, a journey that may have taken them upwards of two years.
Matthew identifies the wise men as Magi wise men from the east.
Now the specific place of origin is debated some, but most scholars agree that Babylon seems to fit the description best.
Babylon, as the compass goes, was indeed east of Judea,
And in ancient writings, Babylon was often called the land of the east.
And we know that the Magi of Babylon were highly regarded for their sophistication, for their expertise in astronomy.
Magi, or wise men, were highly educated people.
They were kind of hybrids.
We have tended in our modern society to separate things like philosophers and religious thinkers and scientists into separate categories, but in that time, for the Magi, I was all kind of lumped into one.
They were themselves scientists, astrologers, professors, noblemen, and magicians.
We get a little glimpse of that back in the Old Testament in the story of Daniel.
Remember Daniel and the lion's den?
Well, Daniel ended up in Babylon around 597 BC.
The Babylonians took the southern kingdom of Judah captive, and they exiled many of the people.
And among the people they exiled, the king instructed that the best and the brightest of the young men should be selected.
And they were going to be trained as wise men and be trained as magi, given the knowledge of Babylon.
And among those who were selected were Daniel and three of his closest friends.
And here's what we find out about them.
As for these four youths, God gave them learning and skill in all literature and wisdom.
And Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.
In every matter of wisdom and understanding about which the king inquired of them, he found them 10 times better than all the magicians and enchanters that were in all his kingdom.
It's a fascinating passage to study in its own right, but we do learn a bit about the kind of training, the education that Magi received.
It was both scholarly as well as mystical.
And we also realized that because of the eclectic mix of cultures, the fact that the Babylonians very eagerly adopted people into their culture, these exiles were brought in and integrated into their society that not only were Daniel and his friends
exposed to the knowledge of Babylon, but the Babylonian Magi got exposed to the knowledge and the writings of the Jews as well.
And so for scholarly researchers who were seeking to understand not only their own times, but the future as well, it's no surprise the Babylonians would have studied the holy texts of Israel.
What did they have to say?
What could they learn from them?
And they would have listened to the best thinkers of Israel with a lot of curiosity to learn what prophetic words they had received.
What did it tell them?
One of the prophetic words that they would have encountered in the Hebrew Scriptures was from a man named Balaam.
Now the story of Balaam is both humorous and it is fascinating.
Balaam was not a Hebrew.
In fact, he was a pagan prophet
who was in the service of a king who was the sworn enemy of the Hebrew people.
The king he served was a man named Balak.
Balak was king of Moab and Balak had a problem.
Turns out he was directly in the path of the advancing Israelites and his city laid just beyond Jericho.
You remember Jericho, the once famous, because the walls fell down?
Well, Balak had seen what happened at Jericho and he's thinking,
I'm gonna need more than a wall to protect me if these Israelites are coming my way.
And so what he planned to do was he thought maybe a powerful magician like Balaam could help him out.
So he asked Balaam to come and he wanted him to use his mystical powers, his connections with whatever God's Balaam might be on good terms with to please come and call down curses on Israel.
Maybe I can get some mystical power on my side of the equation.
And so Balaam, the pagan prophet shows up and Balaam tells him, well, get busy cursing, get to it man.
And the funny thing is every time Balaam enters into one of his trances and attempts to call down curses, all that comes out of his mouth are words of blessing on Israel and calamity for Moab.
Which as you can imagine isn't what Balaam was paying him for.
And Balaam gets more and more frustrated.
He keeps saying, listen, man, curse them, bless us.
And Balaam is like, I'm trying.
But try as he might.
Every time his words come out, he ends up, again, blessing Israel, cursing Moab.
Now, what we're most interested in, and what appears to be something the Babylonian magi took note of, is what happened on Balaam's fourth and final attempt.
Here's what happens.
The Oracle of Balaam, who sees the vision of the Almighty falling down with his eyes uncovered.
You see what he's saying?
He's going, these are my words.
This is my message as I was in this trance state.
I fall down, my eyes are uncovered, but here's what I see.
I see him, but not now.
There's someone coming, but not yet.
I behold him, but not near.
A star
shall come out of Jacob and a scepter shall rise out of Israel."
Now that didn't win poor Balaam any kudos from King Balak.
But with the Jewish rabbis and it would appear the Babylonian magi I picked up on was this prophetic word that there was one who was going to come at some distant point and whose coming would be like a star, a star scepter, a king.
And you gotta admit a comet does kinda look like a star scepter.
Here's the thing I want us to think about.
These characters were people who were looking for God.
They were looking for God in all the wrong places.
Baleam was a Moabite magician.
He made his living practicing whatever dark arts he had learned.
He was certainly no friend of God's people.
If he'd been able to, he would have cursed God's people, and he would have been paid handsomely for doing it.
The Magi were most likely Babylonian magicians.
That's part of where the word magician comes from, that you have Magi.
And yes, they studied the stars and they were good scientists at one level, but mixed into their practical knowledge of the heavens was also a devotion to astrology.
They were not loyal to the one true God.
They knew about Israel's God simply as one of a host of deities and spiritual powers that they thought existed.
Their arts ranged all the way from the scientific to the occultic.
Neither Baelic nor the Magi were monotheistic Hebrews.
They certainly weren't Southern Baptist or Presbyterians either.
They would most accurately, I think, be described as sophisticated
pagans.
So why did God do anything to point them in the right direction?
I think it's because they were true seekers.
Unconventional, yes.
Looking in the wrong places, yes.
But they were looking.
And God made himself findable.
God so loves the world.
Then not only did he send his son to a manger in Bethlehem, he also sent a message to a crusty prophet for hire named Balaam, and he sent a comment to some stargazing Babylonian magi.
So am I saying that occultic trances and astrologies are good ways to find God?
Not at all.
Most of the time, they are terrible ways to find God.
In fact, they can lead you down some pretty dark and dangerous paths.
I would not recommend it.
But what I am saying is that God can reach the most surprising people in the most surprising ways.
Sometimes He communicates with unconventional seekers in very unconventional ways.
And He does that for one simple reason.
He loves them.
What makes the story of those unconventional seekers, the magi significant, is that when they saw the sign of a new king, they went in search for him.
They weren't content to simply look from a distance.
They set out to find him.
The answer to their search was not in the stars.
It was in Bethlehem.
They were unconventional seekers to be sure.
Can you imagine what Mary must have thought when these regal magi appear suddenly in the night at her front door wanting to see the baby and they've got an arm load of gifts for him?
What a surprise.
The apostle Paul in the New Testament once addressed another group of unconventional seekers.
These were Greek thinkers who considered themselves professional philosophers
They loved to seek out new ideas.
They were open to everything when it came to religion.
In fact, they were so open, they had built numerous temples and places of worship.
They'd actually erected one spot that was dedicated to the unknown God.
Just in case we missed one, we don't want him offended.
And Paul says, I would like to talk to you about him.
This from Acts, chapter 17.
This God,
whom you worship without knowing is the one I'm telling you about.
He is the God who made the world and everything in it.
His purpose was for the nations to seek after God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him, though he is not far from any one of us.
Paul says, you can find God.
If you're truly searching for him, he's not far away.
I'd like to tell you the story behind a picture of a little white pony and an amazing journey.
It's a story I first heard in a book by a guy named Don Richardson.
Don is a well-known linguist and anthropologist.
I actually went to college with Don's son many years ago and had the opportunity to drive Don back to the airport one time.
Had about a three-hour ride to the airport together.
Just a fascinating man to talk to.
He wrote a book at one point called Eternity in their Hearts, and of course, for writing that book, he interviewed a guy named Vincent Young.
Now, Vincent had grown up in Burma.
His parents were missionaries there, and they worked among a group of people called the Lahu, or Lehu people.
And the picture of the pony is from an album that Vincent's family had from their time there in Burma.
Now, the pony
did not belong to Vincent's family, did not belong to the Lehu people, the pony came from a village that was far away that belonged to another tribal group called the Wa, WA, not hard to spell.
Now, the Wa were headhunters.
Not all the time, just during planning season, because they thought that putting a fresh head in your garden would give you better crops.
As you can imagine, the was neighbors tended to take their vacations during planting season.
But from time to time, there were wise men among the was who would rebuke their people for this practice.
They would say, the one true God does not want you hunting heads.
Their name for God was Sia.
One of the wise men was a guy named Puchen.
He lived during the 1880s, and one day Puchin announced that he had had a dream.
Sia, the one true God, he said, was going to send them a white brother with a long lost book.
Puchin said he'd been told in his dream that he was to release a certain pony, and that they were to follow it, that the pony would lead them to the white brother, and so, obediently, Puchin chose this white pony
And he appointed some of his young disciples to be the ones to follow the pony wherever it led them.
He put a saddle on the pony's back, because he said, when you find the man that the pony's to lead you to, please ask him to get on and ride the pony, because it would be disrespectful for us to ask our guest to walk the last leg of the journey to us.
So the pony was released.
His disciples, Puchin's disciples, were a bit incredulous.
Because they knew how animals behaved.
The animals lived around the village.
And if a pony got loose, he would just go down and get a drink and kind of hang around.
So that's what they thought was going to happen.
But the pony got down to the creek, and the pony crossed the creek, and the pony kept walking.
So they kept following.
And the pony kept walking, and they kept following.
And the pony did stop at night to rest.
He would eat a bit, but he kept walking.
In fact, he walked for days.
Ultimately, they followed that pony 200 miles to the city of King Tune.
And it finally came to the gate of a walled compound.
And it turned in the gate.
And it walked to a well in the middle of the courtyard.
And it stopped.
The disciples looked around in the courtyard.
They didn't see anyone.
But then they heard a noise.
They heard a noise coming out of the well.
They looked down on the well, and staring back up at them was a white face with blue eyes.
It turned out that William Young was still digging the well, and he was down there digging away.
He was the father of the young Vincent Young, who was the guy that Don Richardson was interviewing.
And so these travelers excitedly asked, I mean, they'd never seen a white brother before, and they said, have you brought the book from God?
And you can imagine, he was a little startled too.
And so he just nodded and said, yes.
And these guys just dropped their knees and they said, please, fetch the book and come with us.
We've brought this pony for you to ride.
Well, he wasn't able to go with them immediately, but what he did do was some of the Lahu people who were followers of Jesus, he sent them with the disciples of Puchen.
And of course, he also sent with them a copy of the Bible.
As a result, Poochan and thousands of the Wah became followers of Jesus.
Unconventional?
Absolutely.
I was reading this and I was thinking about this talk and then I read Don's final comment and I thought I just got to share it.
He said, surely the God who used a star
to lead the Magi to the manger in Bethlehem, could use a mere pony to find a certain well in Kentune.
Maybe you are an unconventional seeker.
Maybe Christmas for you up to this point has been just one more twinkling light in a whole multicolored string of spiritual curiosities.
Maybe you've tried the mystical.
studying the stars, reading your horoscope, chanting the mantras, dabbling in magic, holding on to crystals.
And yet something is still missing.
You're still looking for something, for someone more.
And it may not be a mysterious star and it may not be a little white pony, but you still have the sense that God is leading you on a journey toward something, toward someone
greater.
Maybe Christmas for you is a cynical exercise of seeing through all the hype and the tradition and the ritual because you're a rationalist.
You're a materialist.
You're a skeptic.
And you would like to reduce everything to something that will fit in a test tube.
I get that.
I'm that kind of person.
I've gone through that kind of journey.
And yet, if you're really honest, some of the things that make life most meaningful, some of our deepest questions are things that don't fit in test tubes.
C.S.
Lewis in his book, The Abolition of Man said this, you cannot go on seeing through things forever.
The whole point of seeing through something is to see something through it.
To see through all things is the same as not to see.
Whether you've been looking in all the wrong places or maybe trying hard not to look at all, I want you to know that there is a God who is real and who really loves you.
What happened in Bethlehem was not
a hallmark special.
But it was God radically invading our broken world because he loves us.
He loves you.
I often think of my old friend, Harry Simpson.
Harry had been an engineer by trade and an atheist by faith most of his 90 years.
But one night, Harry said he found himself looking up at the night sky and he was just overcome
by the sheer beauty of it all.
And suddenly a thought flitted through Harry's mind.
He thought there must be something.
There must be someone more.
This couldn't all just be an accident.
Harry said, I knew there had to be a God.
I just wasn't sure that he would know me.
Like those Magi long ago, that started Harry on a sincere quest.
It was a quest that ultimately led him to Jesus.
I would consider Harry an unconventional seeker.
I don't normally see 90-year-old atheist engineers come to faith for the first time.
But Harry discovered late in life, not only that there was a God, but that God did know him.
And he loved him, in fact.
I had the privilege, right in this auditorium, of baptizing Harry Simpson at age 93.
A rather unconventional age, to be sure.
I want to challenge you this Christmas season to consider afresh the star.
If you're a follower of Jesus, I trust that the music and the message of this season moves you.
that you will once again, like those magi, come and bow and worship at the feet of a manual.
God with us.
If you have people you love who seem far away, people who are looking in all the wrong places, make it your prayer that God will reveal himself to those unconventional seekers in ways that they will understand that will draw them.
like he did for those Magi, like he did for Harry.
And if you are one of those unconventional seekers, don't forget to make an honest search in Bethlehem.
I believe that you will find there the one that you're searching for.